Fixes #420 - Add http invocation function definition (#647)
serverlessworkflow/specification: specification.md

    + [Using multiple data filters](#using-multiple-data-filters)
    + [Data Merging](#data-merging)
  * [Workflow Functions](#workflow-functions)
    + [Using Functions for OpenAPI-based RESTFul Service Invocations](#using-functions-for-openapi-based-restful-service-invocations)
    + [Using Functions for HTTP Service Invocations](#using-functions-for-http-service-invocations)
    + [Using Functions for Async API Service Invocations](#using-functions-for-async-api-service-invocations)

>     + [Using Functions for gRPC Service Invocations](#using-functions-for-rpc-service-invocations)

Reviewer: could also change the title of the section from rpc to grpc please

>     + [Using Functions for gRPC Service Invocations](#using-functions-for-rpc-service-invocations)

Reviewer: please rename the header where this links to: #using-functions-for-rpc-service-invocations

We can define if functions are invoked sync or async. Reference
the [functionRef](#FunctionRef-Definition) to learn more on how to do this.

> #### Using Functions for OpenAPI-based RESTful Service Invocations

Author: I agree, brain fart. I'll change it.

For more information about functions, reference the [Functions definitions](#Function-Definition) section.

#### Using functions for HTTP Service Invocations

> For a few reasons, workflow designers might see necessary making straight HTTP invocations to other systems, such as:

Reviewer: I would not mention this just get to point what it does :)

1. Target service might not expose an OpenAPI specification descriptor;
2. Target service might not implement RESTful interfaces;
3. The use case requires a simple HTTP request invocation.

> The specification supports describing HTTP invocations via a simplified interface in the [functions definition](#Function-Definition).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The specification supports describing HTTP requests via a simplified interface in the [functions definition](#Function-Definition).
```
(cf. https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#name-messages )

> The HTTP invocation interface can be described in the `operation` attribute of the function definition, as shown in the example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here is an example function definition for HTTP requests with method `GET` and request target corresponding with [URI Template](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6570.html) `/users/{id}` and host ???.
```

```json
{
"functions": [
  {
    "name": "queryUserById",

>     "operation": "GET#/users/{id}",

Reviewer: would it be ok to not use relative url
i assume since type is http that this does not support https, so we could say that "http:// is pre-pended always 
and operation could be like "GET#myapp.com/users{id}"

Reviewer 2: Agreed. How is the scheme specified (most relevantly "http:" vs. "https:")? How is the host specified?

Author: Sorry, I disagree. 

> Agreed. How is the scheme specified (most relevantly "http:" vs. "https:")? How is the host specified?

Implementations would instruct users on how to properly configure their endpoints per function. In a real use case scenario, these endpoints would change when deploying the workflow on different envs. 

I wouldn't expect users to hardcode the URLs here. The path is a description of the operation, not the full endpoint 

So, for instance:

```json
"functions": [
  {
    "name": "queryUserById",
    "operation": "GET#/users/{id}",
    "type": "http"
  } 
]
```

Describes that this function, in the **path** `/users/{id}` via the GET method would perform a read operation in the users' domain.

Implementations can find a way to provide an external configuration for users to reliably set up their deployments across environments without having to change the operation definition.

For example: `my.configuration.workflowid.funcid.host=http://myservice.com`.

Reviewer 2: Then why not point inside a _file_ expressing such configuration, as is done for
* [OpenAPI](https://github.com/serverlessworkflow/specification/blob/main/specification.md#using-functions-for-restful-service-invocations) (`"operation": "file://confirmationapi.json#sendOrderConfirmation"`), and
* [Async API](https://github.com/serverlessworkflow/specification/blob/main/specification.md#using-functions-for-async-api-service-invocations) (`"operation": "file://streetlightsapi.yaml#onLightMeasured"`), and
* [gRPC](https://github.com/serverlessworkflow/specification/blob/main/specification.md#using-functions-for-rpc-service-invocations) (`"operation": "file://myuserservice.proto#UserService#ListUsers"`), and
* [GraphQL](https://github.com/serverlessworkflow/specification/blob/main/specification.md#using-functions-for-graphql-service-invocations) (`"operation": "https://example.com/pets/graphql#query#pet"`), and
* [OData](https://github.com/serverlessworkflow/specification/blob/main/specification.md#using-functions-for-odata-service-invocations) (`"operation": "https://services.odata.org/V3/OData/OData.svc#Persons"`)

?

Reviewer: yes, making it similar would to what we already have would be preferred pls

Reviewer: still tho like been saying imo users should be able to define a single function def for all http calls which then is rly same thing as what we have already with custom function type. ill show example what i mean in meet

Reviewer: i think we can handle all non-spec-compliant invocations by nust updating custom function type a little

    "type": "http"
  }
]
}
```

> The `operation` attribute is composed by a string separated by the hashtag symbol (`#`):

Reviewer 2: `````suggestion
Note that the [Function Definition](#Function-Definition)'s `operation` property must have the following format:

```text
<HTTP_method>#<request_target>
```
`````
(cf. https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#name-messages )

> * The HTTP method used by the HTTP invocation. Can be any [valid HTTP method](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#name-method-definitions) such as `GET`, `POST`, `PUT`, etc.

Reviewer 2: [RFC 9110](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#name-methods) defines only "standardized methods that are commonly used", but HTTP supports many more than that: https://www.iana.org/assignments/http-methods/http-methods.xhtml#methods

Reviewer: +100! 
i think we are opening a can of worms with this honestly unless we do add all these methods.
with this and all other comments from @gibson042 just confirms that maybe we really just need to allow runtimes to define this via extensions and provide a simple example only (showing that http is doable if wanted) and not get this "monster" into spec....

Reviewer 3: @tsurdilo I disagree. Those methods are slmost never used, if ever. We could just say that they are all supported but that for the sake of brevity only common ones are documented.

@gibson042 I would personally fo the following:

`{method}#{url including scheme and host}`

Reviewer: my problem is not i dont like the functionality its that we can already do this two ways via custom function type and expression function types. so if this does not from user perspective give some ability even if only limited like u said with grpc then its just adding more confusion than it solves

Reviewer: and iirc we added custom function type before for just this :) 
and to add with this we are sctually adding a custom custom type cause not depending on a specification

> * The endpoint **location path**, not the full endpoint URL. Runtimes implementations are **discouraged** to expect the full URL in this field since this is a matter of infrastructure configuration.

Reviewer 2: What does this mean? Where are non-HTTP terms like "location path" defined?

Author: See my other comment about this.

Reviewer 2: What other comment?

The table below lists how to describe the HTTP parameters in the `operation` attribute:

| Parameter | Description | Example |
| --- | --- | --- |

> | Path | Path parameters are part of the location and must be enclosed with brackets (`{}`). The parameter name can be later referenced by the workflow states. | `/user/{id}` |

Author: I'm sorry, I don't understand. What are incorrect? This is a description of the path parameter in the `operation` attribute. I can make it more clear if needed.

> | Path | Path parameters are part of the location and must be enclosed with brackets (`{}`). The parameter name can be later referenced by the workflow states. | `/user/{id}` |

Author: I see. I used the table because it was easier to explain, I'll change to a list.

> | Path | Path parameters are part of the location and must be enclosed with brackets (`{}`). The parameter name can be later referenced by the workflow states. | `/user/{id}` |
> | Query | [Query parameters](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#section-4.2.2) must be enclosed with brackets (`{}`) after the query key separator (`=`). The parameter name can be later referenced by the workflow states. | `/user?status={status}` |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Path | Path parameters must be enclosed with braces (`{}`) as defined by [URI Templates](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6570.html). The parameter name can be later referenced by the workflow states. | `/user/{id}` |
| Query | [Query parameters](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#section-4.2.2) must be enclosed with braces (`{}`) as defined by [URI Templates](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6570.html). The parameter name can be later referenced by the workflow states. | `/user?status={status}` |
```

Also, note that URI Templates support a more straightforward `/user{?status}` syntax for query parameters: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6570.html#section-3.2.8

> Additional HTTP Headers can be passed via the `metadata` function definition. For example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additional HTTP header fields can be passed via the `metadata` function definition. For example:
```
(cf. https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#name-header-fields )

```json
{
"functions": [
  {
    "name": "queryUserById",
    "operation": "GET#/users/{id}",
    "type": "http",
    "metadata": {
      "x-custom-header": "the-value"
    }
  }
]
}
```

> > Runtimes are encouraged to support at least `Content-type: application/json` header when making HTTP invocations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Runtimes are encouraged to support at least `Content-Type: application/json` header field for HTTP requests.
```
Also, how much freedom is allowed to runtimes here? What _MUST_ they support, what _MAY_ they support, and what _MUST NOT_ they support?

> Avoid passing sensible information in headers such as authentication tokens. See the [auth definition](#auth-definition) for more information.

Reviewer: spec has secrets so not sure why user cannot set them? 
so wait, auth def applies here to? we do not support https

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Avoid passing sensitive information in headers such as authentication tokens. See the [auth definition](#auth-definition) for more information.
```

> HTTP request body doesn't need to be described in the function definition. **All the data within the state** should be passed to the HTTP request. See the [action data filter](#action-data-filters) if you need to limit the amount of data passed to a given action.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
HTTP request content doesn't need to be described in the function definition. **All the data within the state** should be passed to the HTTP request. See the [action data filter](#action-data-filters) if you need to limit the amount of data passed to a given action.
```
(cf. https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#name-content )

> **All the data within the state** should be passed to the HTTP request.

In what format?

Author: JSON, as implied by the spec. But I agree to add it here as well. Thanks!

The function can be referenced during workflow execution when the invocation of the HTTP service is desired. For example:

```json
{
"states": [
  {
      "name":"QueryUserInfo",
      "type":"operation",
      "actions":[
       {
          "functionRef": "queryUserById",
          "arguments": {
            "id": "${ .user.id }"
          }
      }],
      "end": true
  }]
}
```

Example of `POST` request sending the state data as part of the body:

```json
{
"functions": [
  {
    "name": "createUser",
    "operation": "POST#/users",
    "type": "http"
  }
]
}
```

Then you can reference the `createUser` function and filter the data to invoke it.

> Data example:

Reviewer: this is workflow data input right? maybe worth making it clear.

```json
{
  "order": { "id": "1234N", "products": [{"name": "Product 1"}]},
  "user": { "name": "John Doe", "email": "john@doe.com" }
}
```

Function invocation example:

```json
{
"states": [
  {
      "name":"CreateNewUser",
      "type":"operation",
      "actions":[
       {
       "functionRef": "createUser",
       "actionDataFilter": {
          "fromStateData": "${ .user }",
          "toStateData": "${ .user.id }"
       }

>       }],

Reviewer 2: Is there any reason for this JSON to not be aligned?

Author: Yes, I made a mistake.

      "end": true
  }]
}
```

> In this case, only the contents of the `user` attribute will be passed to the function. The user ID returned by the HTTP request body will then be added to the state data:

Reviewer 2: > only the contents of the `user` attribute will be passed to the function

What controls the format?

Author: Do you mean the content format? I don't follow. Everything is JSON from the spec perspective.

Reviewer 2: That is non-obvious when talking about generic HTTP requests, and might well need to change in the future.

For more information about functions, reference the [Functions definitions](#Function-Definition) section.

#### Using functions for HTTP Service Invocations

For a few reasons, workflow designers might see necessary making straight HTTP invocations to other systems, such as:

1. Target service might not expose an OpenAPI specification descriptor
2. Target service might not implement RESTful interfaces
3. The use case requires a simple HTTP request invocation

The specification supports making HTTP invocations via a simplified interface in the [functions definition](#Function-Definition).

The HTTP invocation interface can be described in the `operation` attribute of the function definition, as shown in the example:

```json
{
"functions": [
  {
    "name": "queryUserById",

>     "operation": "get:/users/{id}"

Reviewer: i think best to keep operation to use same delimiter "#" as others would do just

"METHOD#EXPRESSION"

feel free to ping me if you want and we can talk

  }
]
}
```

In this case, the `operation` attribute is composed by:

> * The HTTP method used by the HTTP invocation. Can be any [valid HTTP method](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#name-method-definitions) such as `get`, `post`, `put`, etc.

Reviewer: should they be upper case letters? i think maybe if thats the standard we should enforce it as well

Reviewer: POST, GET, PUT, PATCH, and DELETE

Author: I was struggling with this because to me the `operation` field could be a valid URI. But yeah, I guess we can go for `UPDATE#/users/{id}`.

* The endpoint location path. Runtimes implementations are **discouraged** to describe the full URL in this field since this is a matter of infrastructure configuration.

The table below lists how to describe the HTTP parameters in the endpoint location path:

| Parameter | Description | Example |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Path | Path parameters are part of the location and must be enclosed with brackets (`{}`). The parameter name can be later referenced by the workflow states. | `/user/{id}` |
| Query | [Query parameters](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#section-4.2.2) must be enclosed with brackets (`{}`) after the query key separator (`=`). The parameter name can be later referenced by the workflow states. | `/user?status={status}` |

Additional HTTP Headers can be passed via the `metadata` function definition. For example:

```json
{
"functions": [
  {
    "name": "queryUserById",
    "operation": "get:/users/{id}",

>     "metadata": {

Reviewer: wouldnt put metadata in spec doc, maybe if you want to showcase this is better to add it to a new sample

Author: In this case, HTTP Headers are metadata of the request in a sense. What we can do is:

1. Not to describe headers in the operation or function definition and encourage implementations to add a way to do it via configurations. We can argue that's an infra use case.
2. Let the metadata solve this problem like we are doing
3. Introduce an extension for this case, so implementations can optionally use them, so users could define their custom headers there.

I don't have a strong opinion, but I like the idea to describe headers params using the `metadata` field: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#section-6

> a headers lookup table of name/value pairs for extending that control data and conveying additional information about the sender, message, content, or context

Reviewer: ok but see this from user perspective, spec has now a built in feature for http 
but your core example shows the use of metadata to get it working

im not saying not to like use metadata, but for core spec definition http invocation 
metadata should not be necessary.

Reviewer: imo all we need to do here is add the most basic way to do a get/post
nothing more nothing else, make samples as simple as possible please

Reviewer: ok lets discuss on zoom so u can explain me pls

}
```

> #### Using Functions for gRPC Service Invocations

Reviewer 2: This breaks the two preceding `[…](#using-functions-for-rpc-service-invocations)` links.

| Parameter | Description | Type | Required |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| name | Unique function name | string | yes |
| operation | See the table "Function Operation description by type" below. | string | yes |
| type | Defines the function type. Can be either `rest`, `http`, `asyncapi`, `rpc`, `graphql`, `odata`, `expression`, or [`custom`](#defining-custom-function-types). Default is `rest` | enum | no |
| authRef | References an [auth definition](#Auth-Definition) name to be used to access to resource defined in the operation parameter | string | no |
| [metadata](#Workflow-Metadata) | Metadata information. Can be used to define custom function information | object | no |

Function Operation description by type:

| Type | Operation Description |
| ---- | --------- |
| `rest` | <path_to_openapi_definition>#<operation_id> |

> | `http` | <http_method>#<location_path> |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `http` | <HTTP_method>#<request_target> |
```
